The kind of the generating bodhicitta. Again, bodhicitta, of course, we all know intellectually
a little bit. We know that, but bodhicitta is the Sanskrit role and it means the mind
of enlightenment. All bodhi, if we translate it to Buddha, then Buddha is the mind, mind
of the Buddha. So Buddha mind or the enlightened mind. And what is the enlightened mind? Buddha
mind is our love, the compassion, wisdom. What are the Buddha mind? That is Buddha mind.
But that's great master, Guru Padmasambha said in his teaching, "Love and compassion, wisdom,
the mind of the Buddha, if you have that attitude, you're keeping your way, you're keeping life
of the mind with the Buddha." So these three are really the mind of the Buddha. And then
particularly bodhicitta is, that is, I mean, that is the mind with the Buddha. Buddha.
Now when we do the bodhicitta, it's slightly, it's not slightly, it's activating that mind.
We're more activating that. And now if we say, who had that bodhicitta? Who had this love
and compassion and wisdom? According to the greatest teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, every
living we have the love and compassion, wisdom. Because it's the Buddha nature. The love and
the compassion, wisdom is light of the Buddha nature. It's arising energy of the Buddha
nature. No one is the light of the compassion, love and wisdom everyone has. If they don't
have love and compassion with them, people or individual cannot survive. Even the mostly
obscured ego person or self-important, even they have love, they have compassion, they
have wisdom. If they don't have any of those, no one can survive. Survive. Love and compassion
and wisdom is, even the mischievous times of the Inaba samsara or lower, lowest realm
every bone, still we have that. But that time, love and compassion and wisdom is so small,
so small, so limited because he really obscured by the dualities, negative obscurations. Then
human beings, everyone has love and compassion and wisdom. Everyone, when you have love and
compassion and wisdom, their activity in human being, when they do activity, those are known
as good activities, virtuous activities. Whoever that may be, whatever that name, if they're
doing something good, helping to someone, helping support it to someone that is, come
from love, come from compassion, come from wisdom. But that is again, is limited love,
limited compassion, limited wisdom. And that caused what the Buddha teaching said, when
you activity of love and compassion and wisdom, if you do that activity, it will take the
birth in higher realms, in God's realms, all human realms, that activities. But now, both
each other love and compassion, wisdom is something different, has no boundaries. Both each other
has love as no boundaries, no, no, no restrictions. And thinking of all living beings, that
compassion
is spread out to all living beings. That love is spread out for all living beings. That
wisdom is spread out to all, understanding everything. And that is known as both each
other, love and compassion. That all combination, for that reason, combination of that, the
end of the we all know, in this talk, I'm talking relative to the relative body, so
this body that can be divided or not can be, is divided in the teaching to both each other.
That we heard so many times, relative both each other and the absolute true both each
other. So true both each other. And relative both each other is what we're talking, love
and compassion to all living beings. Wisdom, understanding that, that is relative both each
other to all living beings. How to activate that compassion as the greatest teacher of
Buddha mentioned? The poor immeasurable, immeasurable. Love, immeasurable compassion, immeasurable
but your immeasurable of the equities. That is relative both each other. Both each other,
love, both each other, compassion. It's called immeasurable. And of course you understand,
of course, you know already, but why it's called immeasurable? It's because it is called
known as immeasurable. Love and compassion is immeasurable. The object of this both each
other, love and compassion is immeasurable. If I use that word, that way. Subject of love
and compassion is immeasurable. Benefit is immeasurable, immeasurable, your number. And
the time limitation is immeasurable. Therefore called immeasurable. What means object is immeas
urable.
With the projection of the both each other, both each other, we project all living beings.
Not just a few peoples or few beings or this area, that area. No, all living beings, to
every living being. So therefore the object where we are focusing is immeasurable. And
the Buddha teaching said that living beings have no numbers. How many beings there? No
numbers. That in the teaching said that as far as space goes, that far-sentence beings
are existing. As far as long or as far as sentient beings are existing, that far or
that long, that much everyone has emotions and the karmas. As long as they have emotions
and the karmas, there is the experience of the suffering is endless. Continue it goes
to everyone. Therefore, feel all living beings, compassion, to all living beings. This, so
that. And then when we feel compassion, we are not limiting ourselves. Subject is also
immeasurable to all the beings. We open a treasure of our love and compassion from our Rooka,
from that great emptiness, Dharma Dato, feel from beginning. There is no restriction, no
shortages, to all living beings. And the action is also is immeasurable or not targeted this
and that to every living being. And benefit is in the teaching said, is also really immeasurable,
even though we don't detect it immediately with our eyes and thoughts. Thought is immeasurable.
The Rooka's teacher, Buddha Kishakamuni, said in the one, his sotra teacher said, "If the
benefit of the body jata, our one intention of the body jata or immeasurable thought, thought
is the f that comes in the poem, in the poem, f-o-r-m poem, even the space is not big enough
to fit. F-I-T, I believe, to fit. It completely fills the whole sky. That one time our true
benefit in thought, our own immeasurable thought, we activated that in heart and mind, that benefit
have come in the poem, poem side, this even the sky is smaller. Can't fit that. So much
power. There are so many also beautiful stories, I'm sure you know, for having is that beautiful
thought, immediately it will purify obscurations, obstacles, negativities, heal ourselves, really
that. And the greatest teacher, Buddha Kishakamuni, when he was first come to develop the efficient
body jata in heart, that time he was born in hell realms. And poorly, I'm sure you, we heard
so many from that stories, pulling the iron chariot, chariot with the one friend, two of them
pulling, pulling the iron chariot is so heavy and other friend is so weak. But they said the agent
of the hell realm is beating him, that other one. And that Buddha who was born as in hell realm,
he feels so compassionate. Why he's beating because it can't have the cover, he don't have
the standards. I wish I can pull all together, target. So he had that beautiful intention thought
one second or beginning time. And in the teaching said that clay with his karma of being in that
hell realm, and then left to the from the from there to the higher realms. And that is the
beginning of the, in the teaching said, said, wishing bodhicata that greatest teacher Buddha
Kishakamuni developed, wishing bodhicata from that on, then he did that. So this bodhicata is so
powerful, so special, so that, so this relative bodhicata is, and that's what also this relative
bodhicata makes, for example, Mahayana's. Mahayana, just this thinking between Mahayana and
foundation school is because of bodhicata. What that is, bodhicata is relative bodhicata.
When you have the strong relative bodhicata of this wish, best upon the poor,
immacurable, then that practitioners is known as Mahayana practitioners.
Even they don't have the name of Mahayana practitioners, they are Mahayana practitioners,
and they are the poor, boneless. Mahayana is not external labels. Mahayana is the
measurement of the degree of our attitude in the computations, how we develop those, and
really in the teaching said, it's true, this bodhicata is really that. So bodhicata when we
developed, and we developed time, we feel compassion, and take the bodhicata, wow,
when we take the bodhicata, wow. In the teaching said, bodhicata,
compassion, the bodhicata has a true, true highlight, or I'm not using, I said many times,
three, bodhicata is compassion, loving kindness, and wisdom. So if I put compassion and loving
kindness as one, and then wisdom as two, there's two qualities. And so in the teaching said,
compassion and loving kindness, you project to all living beings, more focus to all living beings.
Worship them is projected to the enlightenment, your achievement, your goal. Why? In the teaching
said, because when you have more compassion, loving kindness, you like to help all living
beings, but I cannot do it, can't help everything, whatever you want to do. Kind of even where our
heart is completely open, but our ability is kind of short, full short. For that reason,
then get enlightenment. So projecting to get enlightenment so that I can benefit for all
living beings, more forever, continually. So that is so one and other children,
compassion is projected to all living beings, and wisdom is kind of projected to get enlightenment,
and the combination is then wisdom and compassion, and I'm adding loving kindness, kindness. So
then
that is known as wishing bodhicata. You take the bodhicata, wow, and then practice the bodhicata.
Then when we reach it, when we will achieve the absolute bodhicata. Absolute bodhicata,
this is absolute bodhicata here, this teaching, for example here, second chariot of the generating
bodhicata, that this is absolute bodhicata. We're activating absolute bodhicata now,
but when we will get absolute bodhicata,
when by the practice, continually we will reach the absolute bodhicata, according to the teaching,
we will get absolute bodhicata perfect when we reach the perfect bodhicata, or same path.
Same path or first bodhicata, then we have the perfect absolute bodhicata. This time,
for example, when we meditate in jokki status, when we stroke and then when we discard the wu,
perfectly, and then we maintain it, that that time, as long as we can be able to maintain,
that long is absolute bodhicata, that long. So when we, for example, in this case, in the teaching
mentioned, we learned then looking to the lookers, moment we look to look, looking to the lookers,
how long we can stay in that pristine,
pristine and vastness spacious, free from the, any kind of grasping, clinging, how long we can stay
,
that long is absolute bodhicata, we maintain it, absolute bodhicata. So this is present time,
and the teaching said, at the, for example, you, we heard so many times, there is a five path,
accumulation path, and application path, and the seeing path, those are three paths,
it's first three path, and accumulation path, we, the absolute bodhicata, we intellectually
understand it, intellectually understand the absolute bodhicata in the accumulation path,
and the application path, we will experience in the absolute bodhicata, and then seeing path,
then definitely, now we see the absolute bodhicata, but exactly as it is without the intellectually
,
without experiencing, we see, first to first, that's what's called seeing path,
and we use that as a path, boomies, that's the path of boomies.
In order to reach that realization, and to continue with practices, what in the teachings,
that of course, to pull both relative bodhicata, absolute bodhicata, we have to do three things,
contrary to the teachers, and accumulating the merits, and continually practicing,
and the contract with the qualified teacher, as we discussed in that, teacher has a true
in the teaching said, when you practically, outer teacher, inner teacher, outer teacher,
qualified teacher, as we discussed the other day, and of course, you all know that, inner teacher
is
what? Inner teacher is a compassion, inner teacher is a loving kindness, inner teacher is a wisdom,
inner teacher is the devotions, enjoy, activated that teacher, teacher, so outer teacher,
spiritual friend or teacher, contract in those, and inner teacher keep up
the inner teacher, compassion, loving kindness, wisdom, also inner teacher, contract perfectly
and beautifully according to your capabilities, outer teacher, and politely, respectfully,
with the keen, and with very, very genuinely, interesting, like to observe as all the great
masters practices, that then, with that, preserving the inner teacher, joy, and devotion, and bodh
icata,
and I mean, all that really kept that, with that, then practicing, meditating, continuing as you
visit,
and then I don't know, I said that on third one, third one or the second one, I said,
accumulate the merits, don't give up the meditory activities,
mediturity activity is concluded in six parameters, by regularly first three parameters or four
parameters, what are those? Generous parameters, morality parameters, patient parameters,
concentration parameters, that is the old accumulation of merit practices, then meditating,
meditating on the zokin is the worst of merits, keep the two merits by joyful effort parameters,
continually keeping up, when that continually happens, then we will get, we will advance it,
first part, second part, and then third part, we will advance continuity, then discover
the absolute bodhicata, true absolute bodhicata, absolute bodhicata is
exactly the zokti teaching, as in teaching here, practice zokti meditation,
ommahamudar meditations, that is absolute bodhicata, and now here, in the teaching mentioned here,
it said, I said here, here, how, how, this is the absolute,